Reviewer comments:

Reviewer #1 (Comments for Author):

This manuscript examines synonymous mutations in the HIV-1 Envelope gene. The data are taken from other publications and this is a modelling manuscript. I am not able to judge the mathematical modelling critically but can comment on the potential importance of the conclusions.
The text is clearly written and the written arguments are well spelled out. They observe that synonymous mutations in the C2-V5 region that disrupt modelled base pairs in SHAPE assays are more likely to be lost than other mutations, implying clear fitness costs to the virus, although they point out that those with major costs will never reach high frequencies. They argue that less deleterious mutations, but still with a fitness cost, can rise to high frequency by 'hitch hiking' with immune selected non-synonymous mutations, in other words simple linkage. The selection against synonymous slows down evolution of the virus so selective forces may have been underestimated in the past. 
These are important concepts and show that immune escape mutations should not be considered in isolation. They support the view that 'landscaping' approaches such as that described recently by Chakraborty in Immunity (Immunity 38:606-617, 2013), need to be applied. 



Reviewer #2 (Comments for Author):

The manuscript "Quantifying selection against synonymous mutations in HIV-1 env evolution" by Zanini and Neher analyzes intra-patient HIV data and finds that most synonymous mutation in the RNA stems flanking the variable loops of gp120 are at a selective disadvantage in vivo, with a small selection coefficient of the order of -0.002. They also point to the importance of draft instead of drift in the intrapatient evolution of HIV.

These are interesting results and the manuscript is clearly written.  The second observation is not novel, but underappreciated, whereas this is the first concrete calculation of the average selective disadvantage of silent mutations in HIV taking draft into account.  As such, it is necessary for this work to establish proper error estimates so that the community can make valid use of the results.  With this in mind, the manuscript can be strengthened in the following respects:
1) The modeling generation time of 1 day is odd.  It takes about a day for the virion to integrate and start transcription.  One usually takes 2 days as the mean generation time, but there is individual variation. See next point.
2) Related to the above: the simulation does not address how sensitive the results are to varying the parameters (in particular, the generation time, the outcrossing rate, the mutation rate, and the assigned deleterious fitness of the "non-synonymous" changes).  In the absence of described theoretical analysis shaping our expectations, I strongly feel that this sensitivity analysis needs to be part of the results, and folded into the error bars.
3) The reasonableness of the ranges for the various parameters should be argued with citation to existing literature.
4) I am a bit surprised that the authors chose to do random sampling in their multidimensional parameter space.  One would have expected a Latin hypercube sampling to provide a better coverage.
5) The actual dynamics of HIV in the body is presumably more complex: it is likely that the virions are produced in large bursts of virtually genetically identical virions most of which are then cleared by the body fast on the time-scale of HIV generations. There is no discussion whether this leads to increased stochasticity in the dynamics, nor whether this can influence the quantitative evaluations presented here.  It is possible that the authors mean to absorb these into some kind of reduced effective population size, but a short discussion would be beneficial.
6) In the discussions, the rise of synonymous mutations is attributed to draft, but the fall to selective effects.  In general, some of the fall might also be due to overlapping selective sweeps: the manuscript does not discuss this possibility.

A (Fabio): we consider this possibility in the supplementary fig.4 (multiple escapes in parallel). An increase in competition between escape mutations hardly affects synonymous fixation at all -- only a tiny bit. Note that, compared to a competition scenario without mutual exclusion between escape alleles, this is a worst-case scenario: a synonymous allele hitchhiking on an escape mutant that is being overtaken will never fix as a recombinant between the beneficial mutants, because of the negative epistasis between them.

7) The observed neutral fixation pattern of the nonsynonymous mutations is mentioned, and two explanations have been proposed to duet of increased diversity over synonymous mutations with no increase of fixation over neutral expectations.  Neither of the explanations, however, are plausible (at least, without argument) absent experimental evidence not mentioned in the text.  It would perhaps be better to either strengthen this discussion with citation to literature, or to weaken it by mentioning these as mere possibilities amongst others.
